2024 results (#134)
geeksblabla/stateofdev.ma: results/2024/sections/tech.mdx

---
title: Technology
position: 5
---

# Technology

JavaScript remains the most popular language and is loved by the Moroccan community, ahead of Java, Python, and PHP.

> Rust is at the top spot for programming languages that developers want to learn next. Further down the list, we also see Python and TypeScript as the most wanted programming languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for wanted languages, Rust has slightly decreased in favour of Golang, yet both still being at the top of the list, followed right away by Python, Java and TypeScript. 
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="Popular">
    <Chart id="tech-q-2" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="Loved ">
    <Chart id="tech-q-0" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="Wanted">
    <Chart id="tech-q-1" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Front-end frameworks/libraries

> As always, the famous library for front-end development is React.js. It remains the most loved and desired by the community, surpassing VueJs and Angular.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React keeps the top for this year as the most popular front-end JavaScript library. It is then followed right away with Next.js which overtook Angular this year.
```

> NextJS is the most wanted framework in the list in front of ReactJS and passing both VueJs, Angular and Svelte.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next.js also keeps its first position this year on the wanted technologies list. It is then followed by the 3 usual front-end frameworks/libraries.
```

> Htmx, Qwik, and Astro are getting more attention from the community this year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This year however, Remix gained popularity as some respondents seem interested by it.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="Popular">
    <Chart id="tech-q-3" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="Wanted">
    <Chart id="tech-q-4" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## CSS frameworks

> More than half of the respondents are using classic CSS frameworks like Bootstrap, Material UI, and Tailwind CSS is gaining more popularity in the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to last year, it looks like more respondents are relying on Tailwind CSS as their go-to tools for easily creating CSS.
CSS Frameworks aswell as classic CSS are also very much present.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="2024">
    <Chart id="tech-q-5" title={false} year={2024} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2023">
    <Chart id="tech-q-5" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Backend frameworks/libraries

> The Java-based framework used to create a microservice, or what we call the Spring ecosystem, is the most popular backend framework used by the Moroccan community, ahead of Express.js, Laravel, Django and the .NET framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most popular choices for backend develoment are Java frameworks (Spring, JEE, Quarkus), JavaScript/Typescript (Express.js, Nest.js), PHP (Laravel, Symfony) and Python (Django, Flask, FastAPI).

The Spring ecosystem keeps its leading position on the wanted list.
```

> Spring is also the most wanted backend framework in the list, in front of Nest.js and Django.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Spring ecosystem keeps its leading position on the wanted list.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="Popular">
    <Chart id="tech-q-6" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="Wanted">
    <Chart id="tech-q-7" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Platforms and tools

> Node.js has taken the lead as the most used platform, surpassing Docker and JVM.

Reviewer: Node.js is the leading platforms which developers use to run their applications, followed by Docker and the JVM.

> Developers are increasingly interested in learning deployment, scaling, and management skills, with Kubernetes being the most wanted platform and tool, surpassing Docker, Node.js, and React Native.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Respondents are also very interested in learning Docker and Kubernetes which are considered the defacto-standard tools for deploying applications on a large scale.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="Popular">
    <Chart id="tech-q-8" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="Wanted">
    <Chart id="tech-q-9" title={false} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Primary operating systems

As always Windows is Still the most Primary Os that most Moroccan developers use

<Tabs>

>   <TabItem title="2023">

Reviewer: The 2024 tab is needed here

    <Chart id="tech-q-10" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2022">
    <Chart id="tech-q-9" title={false} year={2022} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2021">
    <Chart id="tech-q-9" title={false} year={2021} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## IDE & Code Editors

> Unsurprisingly, VSCode is the most used code editor same as last year, More than 80% of respondents use it to write their code. Jetbrains IDEs are second by 35% and only 12% are Vim users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VSCode is the most used code editor by the respondents, followed right away by JetBrains editors and IDEs. Terminal based editors (vim, neovim, emacs, etc.) are also used by a part of respondents. Some respondents are also using Cursor which is an editor focusing on first-class AI support.
```

<Chart id="tech-q-11" title={false} />

## Learning New Technologies

Our industry is always evolving. The Moroccan IT community is aware of this and striving to keep up with the pace.

> That's what we see here, people learn new Technologies every few months, and 31% of respondents are learning new Technologies once a year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a continuous learning effort, respondents try to learn new technologies and tools, from every few months to every few years.
```

<Chart id="tech-q-12" title={false} />

## How do you solve problems?

> Despite the increasing use of AI in the tech industry, individuals continue to rely on Google as their primary source for problem-solving. This year, there is a noticeable shift toward using AI Assistants over StackOverflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to last year, more respondents seem to rely on AI assistants for asking questions. This is most likely due to the nature of their concise responses with minimal search effort.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="2024">
    <Chart id="tech-q-13" title={false} year={2024} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2023">
    <Chart id="tech-q-13" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Deployment environment

> In software deployment, an environment, or tier is a computer system or set of systems in which a computer program or software component is deployed and executed. That's why most of the developers use public cloud providers, like AWS, Azure, and Google Cloud Platform to deploy their applications, and other ones use on-premise servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the public cloud providers are the go-to solution for deploying applications, managed PaaS solutions have decreased in popularity over the years.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="2024">
    <Chart id="tech-q-14" title={false} year={2024} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2023">
    <Chart id="tech-q-14" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2022">
    <Chart id="tech-q-13" title={false} year={2022} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Cloud Providers

A cloud platform refers to the operating system and hardware of a server in an Internet-based data center. It allows software and hardware products to co-exist remotely and at scale.

> Moroccan techs use mostly AWS as the first choice beside Azure and other Cloud providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Morocco, AWS and Azure seem to be the dominant choice for deploying in the cloud. Moroccan cloud providers are marginally used.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="2024">
    <Chart id="tech-q-15" title={false} year={2024} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2023">
    <Chart id="tech-q-15" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2022">
    <Chart id="tech-q-14" title={false} year={2022} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Database

> A production database contains the data you are using for production tasks such as creating and updating features. This year, PostgreSQL surpasses MySQL/MariaDB as the most used database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A production database contains the data you are using for production tasks such as creating and updating features.

SQL database are the dominant type of databases for production. NoSQL databases are also used (MongoDB, Redis, Cassandra, etc.) although their usecases may be slightly different than SQL ones.
```

<Tabs>
  <TabItem title="2024">
    <Chart id="tech-q-16" title={false} year={2024} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2023">
    <Chart id="tech-q-16" title={false} year={2023} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2022">
    <Chart id="tech-q-15" title={false} year={2022} />
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem title="2021">
    <Chart id="tech-q-15" title={false} year={2021} />
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Writing tests

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

More than half of the respondents write different types of tests, while the rest don't. "Testing is doubting" they say 😄 .
```
